KNOWN_ISSUES.md, before:

# Known Issues

## MDX v3 Production Build Limitation

### Issue
Production builds fail with `@mdx-js/rollup` v3.x due to strict ESM validation in `micromark-extension-mdxjs-esm`.

**Error**: `Unexpected 'FunctionDeclaration' in code: only import/exports are supported`

### Root Cause
MDX v3 uses strict ESM parsing that rejects any non-import/export statements. The error occurs during internal MDX processing, not from user code.

### Impact
- **Development server**: ✅ Works perfectly
- **Production builds**: ❌ Fails for all MDX files

### Attempted Solutions
All attempts failed to resolve the issue:

1. **Downgraded to @mdx-js/rollup v2.3.0**
   - Result: Different parsing errors

2. **Tried vite-plugin-mdx**
   - Result: Module import compatibility issues

3. **MDX configuration variations**
   - `development: true/false`
   - `jsxImportSource` settings
   - `providerImportSource` settings
   - Disabling syntax highlighting plugins
   - Result: All configurations still fail

### Workaround
Use the development server for now:
```bash
bun dev
```

### Future Resolution
Possible approaches:
- Wait for MDX v3.2+ with relaxed ESM validation
- Implement custom markdown processor
- Use alternative MDX plugins when available
- Configure Vite to use development mode for MDX even in production

### References
- https://github.com/micromark/micromark-extension-mdxjs-esm#unexpected-type-in-code-only-importexports-are-supported
- @mdx-js/rollup v3.1.1 has strict ESM validation
- Related to code blocks (```typescript, ```bash, etc.) in MDX files

Commit message:

docs: Confirm MDX issue affects ALL Vite builds
Extended investigation confirms that the MDX v3 strict ESM validation
is triggered by Vite's build process itself, not the build mode.

Findings:
- Vite build (production): ❌ fails
- Vite build --mode development: ❌ also fails
- Vite dev server: ✅ works

The `development: true` MDX config option does NOT bypass the strict
ESM validation during builds.

Root cause: Vite's build process triggers micromark-extension-mdxjs-esm
strict validation regardless of mode or MDX config.

This completely blocks SSG implementation until:
- MDX v3.2+ relaxes validation, OR
- Alternative markdown processor is used, OR
- Custom workaround is implemented

Current state:
- ✅ Development workflow: fully functional
- ❌ Production builds: blocked
- ❌ SSG: blocked (requires builds)
- ⏳ Hydration: architecture ready, waiting for builds

Updated:
- KNOWN_ISSUES.md with critical finding
- examples/docs/build.ts with development mode attempt
- Added react-dom dependency for future SSR

KNOWN_ISSUES.md, after:

# Known Issues

## MDX v3 Production Build Limitation

### Issue
Production builds fail with `@mdx-js/rollup` v3.x due to strict ESM validation in `micromark-extension-mdxjs-esm`.

**Error**: `Unexpected 'FunctionDeclaration' in code: only import/exports are supported`

### Root Cause
MDX v3 uses strict ESM parsing that rejects any non-import/export statements. The error occurs during internal MDX processing, not from user code.

### Impact
- **Development server**: ✅ Works perfectly
- **Production builds**: ❌ Fails for all MDX files

### Attempted Solutions
All attempts failed to resolve the issue:

1. **Downgraded to @mdx-js/rollup v2.3.0**
   - Result: Different parsing errors

2. **Tried vite-plugin-mdx**
   - Result: Module import compatibility issues

3. **MDX configuration variations**
   - `development: true/false`
   - `jsxImportSource` settings
   - `providerImportSource` settings
   - Disabling syntax highlighting plugins
   - Result: All configurations still fail

### Critical Finding
Even Vite builds with `mode: 'development'` trigger the strict ESM validation. The `development: true` MDX option does NOT bypass this check. This means:
- ❌ `vite build` (production mode) - fails
- ❌ `vite build --mode development` - also fails
- ✅ `vite dev` (dev server) - works

**Conclusion**: The issue is triggered by Vite's build process itself, not the build mode.

### Workaround
Use the development server for now:
```bash
bun dev
```

### Future Resolution
Possible approaches:
- Wait for MDX v3.2+ with relaxed ESM validation
- Implement custom markdown processor
- Use alternative MDX plugins when available
- Configure Vite to use development mode for MDX even in production

### References
- https://github.com/micromark/micromark-extension-mdxjs-esm#unexpected-type-in-code-only-importexports-are-supported
- @mdx-js/rollup v3.1.1 has strict ESM validation
- Related to code blocks (```typescript, ```bash, etc.) in MDX files
